22_Review Session

Objectives

* Define myelodysplastic syndromes.
* Identify the symptoms, signs, potential causes, diagnostic tests, clinical and pathological findings, classifications, laboratory findings, associated features, treatment, and prognosis in myelodysplastic syndromes including polycythemia vera, essential thrombocytosis, and chronic myelogenous leukemia .
* Compare and contrast the following disorders: chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), polycythemia vera (P. vera), primary myelofibrosis, and essential thrombocythemia (ET) in terms of clinical features and presentation, peripheral blood and bone marrow findings, other laboratory findings, cytogenetics, complications and clinical course. Discuss clinical and laboratory features useful in differentiating a myeloproliferative disorder from a leukemoid reaction. Compare and contrast polycythemia vera, relative polycytehmia, and secondary polycythemia in terms of etiology and diagnostic criteria.
* Define and classify acute and chronic leukemias based on their pathophysiology, epidemiology, genetics, risk factors, morphological findings, immunophenotype, clinical findings, disease course, and prognosis.
* Identify the management options for acute and chronic leukemias including effectiveness, a timeline for effectiveness, goals of treatment, prognosis, risks and benefits of treatment.
* Compare and contrast: acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), and hairy cell leukemia (HCL) in terms of: incidence and age distribution, cytogenetics, morphology (bone marrow and peripheral blood), immunophenotyping, laboratory diagnosis (including cytochemical stains), clinical features, prognosis.
* Define a leukocyte left shift and list at least three benign or reactive causes. Contrast expected peripheral blood findings in a patient with acute bacterial infection versus a patient with viral infection. Describe bone marrow failure and discuss potential etiologic factors. Describe symptoms associated with neutropenia, anemia and thrombocytopenia. List the major etiology and pathogenesis of leukopenia, leukemoid reaction, neutropenia, lymphocytosis, left shift, reactive lymphocytosis, eosinophilia, monocytosis, basophilia and leukoerythroblastic reaction.
* Define and list potential causes of lymphadenopathy. Describe the proper submission of a lymph node biopsy to the surgical pathology for evaluation of a suspected lymphoproliferative disorder.
* Compare and contrast Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma in terms of clinical features, distribution of disease, involvement of extranodal sites and morphology.
* Discuss general features of non-Hodgkin lymphomas in terms of incidence, immunophenotyping, morphologic patterns (diffuse versus follicular), principles of classification, grading, staging, laboratory methuds used in diagnosis, clinical features, predisposing factors, prognosis, extralymphatic involvement, and likelihood of a leukemic phase. Contrast low versus high grade non-Hodgkin lymphomas with regard to aggressiveness and potential for cure.
* Describe and recognize diagnostic cells in Hodgkin disease. State the usual age distribution and discuss expected clinical course and prognostic factors.
* List the common laboratory tests usually used for the initial work-up of coagulopathies and describe each noting the state of coagulation it assesses, the disorders in which it is abnormal, and its use in monitoring anticoagulation therapy.
